---
title: 'Mapping Finance: The Push for Privatization of Banks'
layout: post
cover_url: "/media/COVER .jpg"
date: 2018-06-11 00:00:00 +0000
description: C.P. Chandrasekhar

---
### **The Push for Privatization of Banks**

Prabhat Patnaik

From  the very beginning there has always been a demand for undoing bank  nationalization in India. This demand naturally gathered momentum with  the adoption of neo-liberal policies. It was completely unacceptable to  international finance capital that the bulk of the banking sector in a  country like India should remain under public ownership. Accordingly,  “friends” of the Wall Street working in the U.S. administration like Tim  Geithner and Larry Summers would visit India and demand of our  government that, even if it could not privatize the entire banking  sector, at least it should send a “signal” by privatizing the State Bank  of India.

The  Indian government however demurred because it feared a backlash of  people’s anger. More recently, however, with the non-performing assets  of public sector banks mounting, there has been a further push for bank  privatization, with a former Deputy Chairman of the Niti Ayog even  asking all political parties to put it on their agenda for the 2019  elections.

Unfortunately for these privatization advocates, real-life has exposed the vacuity of their argument _even on the basis of their own premises_ almost  immediately after they have advanced it. Thus the absurdity of the  Summers-Geithner push for privatization was demonstrated by the 2008  financial crisis in the U.S. This crisis, though it engulfed much of the  capitalist world, left the Indian banking system, barring the private  sector ICICI bank, virtually untouched, since the public sector banks,  motivated by a different set of objectives, hardly held much foreign  assets, let alone foreign “toxic” assets. Likewise, the recent NPA-based  argument for privatization on the grounds that private share-holders’  vigilance ensures better administration of banks and would not allow the  sort of NPA build-up that has occurred in the public sector banks, has  been shown to be a hollow one by the happenings in the ICICI bank. Its  Chief executive has been charged with “cronyism” in fixing a large loan  for the Videocon group which has helped her husband’s business  interests. Ironically, the supposedly “vigilant” share-holders of the  ICICI bank have not even asked her to go on leave while the charges  against her are being investigated. (Initial reports that they had done  so have later been denied).

All  this push, though it has failed to undo nationalization, has succeeded,  nonetheless, in forcing a creeping privatization of the nationalized  banks, and this has been effected on the basis of a completely spurious  argument, which goes as follows.

The  public sector banks’ capital base has to be strengthened to satisfy the  Basel III “norms”; but since the government does not have adequate  fiscal resources for strengthening their capital base, and should not  use scarce fiscal resources for this purpose even if it had them, it  should raise equity from the private sector for doing so. The public  sector equity share accordingly has come down sharply from its original  100 percent.

This  argument for taking in private equity is completely spurious for  several reasons: first, strengthening the capital base may be required  in the case of private banks, but hardly in the case of public sector  banks, since everyone is certain that the government would always come  to the banks’ rescue if they faced a crunch. It is noteworthy that even  recently in the wake of the Punjab National Bank scandal, where Neerav  Modi had decamped with Rs.13000 crores of this bank’s resources, there  was no panic withdrawal of deposits from it: the depositors were  confident that their deposits were safe in a government-owned bank.  Hence the Basel-III norms are not at all relevant for public sector  banks.

Second,  even if these banks’ capital base is to be strengthened, the funds do  not have to come from the budget itself. Since banks do not  get called  upon to dip into their capital base in the normal course, and just hold  this amount for a “rainy day” that never comes, if the government  borrowed the amount required for capitalizing its banks from the Reserve  Bank, then that amount would simply lie with the RBI. It would in short  be a pure book transaction of the RBI, which, even though it would _appear_ as a fiscal deficit in the government’s budget, would just be a notional deficit, and _have zero adverse effects on the economy._ Hence,  again, there is no real reason for going to the capital market for  strengthening the capital base of public sector banks.

These  spurious arguments however have been used for effecting a creeping  privatization. But creeping privatization is not good enough for  international finance capital. It wants outright privatization, not just  only that would open up a vast amount of financial resources for it to  control, but also because it would underscore the ideological point, so  crucial for the _modus operandi_ of  finance, that social interest is best served not by State control over  finance, but by according full freedom to finance, or, put differently,  by finance’s control over the State. And towards this end, the NPA  crisis of the public sector banks, is being used to the hilt.

Even  this use however is marked by utterly spurious arguments. Two points in  particular have to be noted here. First, the most important reason for  the NPA crisis is “corporate loot” of the public sector banks, in a  context where the government has been putting pressure on these banks to  give large loans to the private sector for “infrastructure” investment.

The  reason for the government’s putting this pressure is itself a spurious  argument, which goes as follows. The government cannot undertake the  infrastructure investment itself, because that would swell the fiscal  deficit. Hence this investment has to be done by the private sector, and  for this bank finance is essential. Now, if the government did  undertake this investment then it would have to borrow from these banks  (which is how its fiscal deficit would be financed); hence this argument  amounts to saying that if the government borrows from the banks for  investing in infrastructure then that is bad for the economy, while if  the private sector borrows from the banks for investing in  infrastructure then that is good for the economy, which is a completely  absurd proposition.

But,  anyway, because of this absurd argument, the government has been  pressurizing banks to lend hugely to the private corporate sector, and  several of these corporates are simply filching this money in what must  be a novel form of primitive accumulation of capital. Of the total NPAs  of around 8-9 lakh crores of rupees, corporate borrowers are believed to  account for about 75 percent, and 75 percent of these corporate loans  in turn are believed to constitute pure filching, i.e. “corporate loot”  pure and simple, which thus amounts to 56.25 percent of the total NPAs.

It  is sheer effrontery on the part of the privatization advocates to  demand that those who have carried out this loot of bank funds should be  rewarded by the ownership of the very banks they have looted, on the  grounds that the banks are in a sorry state (because of this loot). What  is needed on the contrary is not privatization of banks, but their  continuation as State-owned entities, the argument for which remains as  valid today as it had been in 1969 when the banks were nationalized, _together with punitive measures against those who have carried out this loot_.

Incredibly,  let alone take such punitive measures, the government has not even  disclosed the names of the large defaulters on loans from public sector  banks. It has not disclosed these names even when the loans of these  defaulters have been written off, which means they have been free to go  on borrowing from other banks, even as they claim helplessness in  repaying, and hence get reprieve, from some banks.

Indeed, _all_ government measures in this sphere have been based on taking the _firm_ as  the point of reference. But in all cases of willful default, i.e. where  it is established through investigation that the default is a case of  “corporate loot”, the promoters’ property must be attached, including  what they own through other firms in their empire. This very simple  expedient would be a major deterrent against corporate loot, and would  also bring back a substantial amount of the defaulted loans.

But,  it may be asked, are we past the point of no return as far as saving  public sector banks is concerned? The simple answer is “no”. Not only is  the NPA crisis a result largely of “corporate loot”, but the crisis  itself is being exaggerated to push the privatization agenda.

Why  do I say so? When Narendra Modi had undertaken his absurd  demonetization measure, the banks had suddenly become flush with funds,  since people had rushed to deposit their currency holdings. _But this huge increase in bank resources did not lead to any larger credit_;  rather, banks chose to hold these funds in government bonds, for which  new government bonds had to be created whose sale proceeds could not  even be spent by the government (since that would have increased the  fiscal deficit to the annoyance of finance capital).

Thus  what the demonetization exercise clearly showed is that the  disbursement of credit in India is not supply-constrained but  demand-constrained (in the sense of being constrained by the  credit-demand of borrowers _whom the banks consider creditworthy_). The existence of NPAs therefore is _not_ choking  credit from the supply-side, whence it follows that if the government  actually capitalized the public sector banks by borrowing from the RBI,  then the amount of such borrowing would simply be held by the RBI itself  (as banks’ capital). This would just be a book transaction of the RBI  with no adverse effects on the economy whatsoever.

It  follows therefore that even if infusion of fresh capital into public  sector banks has to be done owing to their large NPAs, there is still no  need to rely on private sector equity for such capital infusion. The  current claim to the contrary is meant merely to dupe people into  believing that, because of the NPAs, there is no alternative to  privatizing public sector banks. This bluff must be called.

(This article was originally published in [The People’s Democracy](https://peoplesdemocracy.in/2018/0610_pd/push-privatising-banks))