---
title: 'IDEAs: Non-performing Power Sector Assets- Signalling a Larger Crisis '
layout: post
cover_url: "/media/COVER .jpg"
date: 2018-09-16 18:30:00 +0000
description: C. P. Chandrasekhar

---
### Non-performing Power Sector Assets : Signalling a Larger Crisis 

##### C. P. Chandrasekhar

Having overcome a legacy of ext­reme shortage of supply, India’s  power sector is in the midst of a crisis with ramifications of a wholly  diff­erent kind. The crisis arises because firms accounting for a  significant proportion of power sector assets have defaulted on their  debt-servicing commitments, and banks are not able to find ways of  rest­r­u­cturing that debt or recouping their money. So the Reserve Bank  of India’s (RBI) guidelines require that the assets should be  liquida­ted to recover whatever is possible and compensate banks from  which these firms had taken loans, and then defa­ulted. But the  assessment is that liquidation would yield the banks little, if anything  at all.

There are 34 projects that have been ide­n­tified as stressed,  accounting for 24,405 MW of commissioned capacity and another 15,725 MW  of capacity that is still under construction. The total outstanding debt  in these projects is 1.74 lakh crore. The projects are stressed either  because the loans concerned have been declared as non-performing assets  (NPAs) or are identified as being potential NPAs. Gross NPAs in the  power sector were, at the end of June 2017, placed at 37,941 crore, of  which as much as 34,244 crore was in generation. But the magnitude of  NPAs is set to rise in the coming weeks and months.

Banks are not keen on going in for liquidation, as they expect the  “haircut” or the loss that they would incur to be substantial, because  the receipts from the sale of assets would fall short of payments due to  them. But as per the February guidelines issued by the RBI, banks had  180 days from the first date of default on payments to settle the  matter. That deadline has passed in late August for many firms in the  power sector, requiring the banks to move for liquidation of assets.

To avoid that outcome, the concerned banks had approached the RBI to  give them some flexibility as they seek to find alternative ways of  recouping better value from these assets. But the RBI has turned down  the request. Large losses seem unavoidable. That would erode the capital  base of the banks and necessitate recapitalisation. The government as  ow­ner must take a call and recapitalise the banks with taxpayers’  money. In the final analysis, the losses, much of which are incurred by  new privately promoted projects, are being socialised.

This peculiar situation raises a number of questions. To start with,  the default by multiple players needs explaining. Given the scale of the  problem and the large number of players involved, it cannot be  attributed to mismanagement alone. Nor could it be attributed to  government inte­r­­vention. Both the electricity sector (esp­eci­ally  after the passage of the Electricity Act, 2003) and the coal sector  (after the Supreme Court quashed all but four coal allocations, and the  government moved to auctioning coal res­ources) have been subject to a  major shift in policy to a market-friendly regime. Ele­­ctricity tariffs  are subject to some regulation no doubt, but tariffs are based on  actual costs to which is added a needed return. So if generating  companies are able to justify their cost claims, which in the case of  these mainly thermal power projects in­clude a substantial coal cost  component, recommended tariffs are set on that basis. The generating  companies enter into power purchase agreements (PPAs) with supplying  firms that then reach the power to consumers whether through their own  or hired distribution facilities.

**Liberalised Prices**

A core problem app­ears to be that post liberalisation, power  capacity has expanded so fast that not all generators are able to tie up  PPAs at prices that are reasonable. There has been a growth of short  term and spot market sales arrangements with relatively low prices on  offer. This trend has been stren­g­thened by the emergence of unutilised  capacities. At the end of fin­ancial year 2001–02, before the  Electricity Act, 2003 liberalised entry into the sector, installed  generation capacity stood at 1,05,046 MW. That figure rose to 1,32,329  MW at the end of March 2007, 1,99,877 MW at the end of March 2012 and to  a remarkable high of 3,29,298 MW in March 2017. Clearly, expecting to  gain from the opening up of a sector characterised by shortage, private  investors had rushed in without a clear assessment of market demand at  the higher, liberalised prices. The Ministry of Power claims that  despite this growth of capacity, there is no surplus in times of peak  power demand. But, there clearly is substantial surplus during off-peak  hours, since the plant load factor of thermal power plants has fallen  from 79% in 2006–07 to 60% in 2016–17. Part of the problem seems to be  that the depressing effects of higher (post-liberalisation) prices on  demand had not been factored in when demand projections were made.

Moreover, some firms had either not provided for the possibility that  they may not have assured access to reasonably priced coal or had  presumed that they would be able to cushion the effects of higher-priced  coal by hiking prices fixed in PPAs. This did work for some, but not  for all. Many of the firms that are defaulting have not been able to  enter into PPAs, and are dependent on short-term markets. Distribution  companies too have woken up to the fact that they can access cheaper  power outside of PPAs.

One indicator of the state of play is that, wanting certainty with  regard to coal supply, firms faced with a competitive power market have  been willing to negotiate PPAs in which power is priced, based on zero  coal cost. The government adopted a special reverse auction process for  those bidding for captive coal blocks from the power sector, where the  prices are regulated through PPAs or price fixing authorities. The  winner was the bidder who was willing to set coal price at its lowest  for calculation of power tariffs to be included in the PPA. Bidders had  to compete to offer discounts relative to the price of equivalent grade  coal charged by Coal India Limited (CIL), which was set as the ceiling  price. If no coal block auction had been held, CIL’s price would define  the coal cost taken into account when pricing electricity, irrespective  of the actual cost of extracting coal from the captive coal block that  supports electricity production. Under the reverse auction scheme, the  bidder quotes a price equal to or below the CIL benchmark, which would  be taken into consideration when pricing electricity produced with coal  extracted from the block being auctioned. Besides this, the bidder must  offer to pay the government of the state in which the block is located a  fee quoted per tonne for the coal extracted. The reserve or minimum fee  to be paid to the state government was set at \`100 per tonne. What is  surprising is that in the case of many blocks, bidders have agreed to  set the fuel cost in the power tariff calculation at zero. That amounts  to absorbing the costs of extraction by reducing the margins they  receive. In addition, these bidders have, in an associated bid, offered  to pay the state government much more than the \`100 per tonne reserve  price. Competition was clearly depressing the margins garnered by the  generators.

**Distressed Loans**

Those without access to captive blocks have not been free of problems  either, because the price of coal from other sources such as imports,  for example, has been rising. Trapped between depressed power tariffs  and falling demand, on the one hand, and rising coal prices or  inadequately compensated coal costs, on the other, the industry has  found its profits eroded, leading to the failure to meet debt service  commitments. The problem is that with banks having financed the  expansion of capacity in this sector to a substantial extent, they are  taking the hit. Promoters are walking away, leaving the banks to fend  for themselves.

However, unable to find a buyer whose offer pleases all lenders, the  banks have not been able to meet the government’s deadline for  resolution, and are now required to take the assets to liquidation.  Thus, the Power Finance Corporation (PFC) was looking to recover the  distressed loans by selling three power units (GMR Raikheda with 1,370  MW, KSK Mahanadi with 2,400 MW, and Avantha-owned Jhabua Power with 600  MW) it had partly lent to. But, other lenders were not willing to accept  any of the available bids since they were too low. With few takers for  these assets, especially those in firms without PPAs and assured coal  supplies, potential buyers are keeping their offers low and waiting for  liquidation to win bargains at discounts (implying haircuts for the  banks) that are huge. Among the bidders for the three projects that the  PFC was involved in, for example, were Adani Power, Ved­anta, JSW  Energy, JM Financial, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, and Edelweiss—big  players looking to buy cheap and profit hugely from operations or resale  at a later date.

In a last ditch effort, the government through the Rural  Electrification Corporation attempted to set up an asset reconstruction  company (ARC) under a Power Asset Revival through Warehousing and  Rehabilitation (or PARIWARTAN) scheme. Lenders can park the stressed  assets with the ARC, making the required provision in their books, and  avoid liquidation. The assets would be transferred at book value in  return for a “warehousing” receipt. The ARC can hold the assets for 60  months, during which, with the help of a professional operations and  maintenance company, it would attempt to revive the units concerned and  find a buyer willing to pay a price that does not short-change the banks  too much. However, where would the funds to run the ARC come from and  how would the banks manage the provisioning when they are getting  nothing for those assets till much later? Besides provisioning, the  lenders are expected to support the ARC to the tune of 15% of the value  of the assets to be transferred. Since some lenders are not willing to  financially back the ARC, bringing the idea to fruition is proving  difficult. Meanwhile, liquidation day app­roaches.

Thus, if an attempt is made to unravel the debt conundrum in the  power sector, it becomes clear that the NPAs are merely a symptom of the  crisis afflicting the industry. The crisis itself is due to the fact  that liberalisation, which was justified on the grounds that it would  accelerate capacity creation and overcome the pre-liberalisation  shortages of power resulting from inadequate public capital formation,  had rendered the industry unviable. The burden of the crisis is not  being mainly borne by the promoters of these projects, but by public  banks and the state exchequer. Further, if liquidation takes place,  bargain hunters from within the industry would have the last laugh and  the money.

[(This article was originally published in the Economic and Political Weekly : September 15, 2018)](){:target="_blank"}